WAYS OF CONVEYING THE PASSIVE VOICE CONSTRUCTIONS

Some ways of expressing the passive voice in both languages may coincide in form and structure as can be seen in the following sen­tence: She was disturbed by what her mother had said. (Maugham) - Вона була стурбована тим, що сказала її мама.

Other passive voice constructions should be transformed in order to achieve faithfulness in translation. English passive forms referring to present tense have mostly no structural equivalents in Ukrainian where the auxiliary verb to be (є) is usually omitted and the past participle acquires other morphological and semantic expression. For example:

Rescue efforts are being hampered by dozens of aftershocks, below-freezing temperatures. - Рятувальним роботам перешкоджають повторні поштовхи і температура, що падає нижче нуля.

One more faithful Ukrainian transformation of this passive construction may be achieved by way of conveying it through the so-called middle voice form or -ся/-сь verb: Рятувальні роботи утруднюються повторними підземними поштовхами і тем­пературою, що падає нижче нуля.

Depending on the form of the passive construction and still more on the lexical verbal meaning, the passive voice form may have in Ukrainian some other transformations, namely:

a)  an indefinite personal sentence: I am told that pork-packing is the most lucrative profession after politics  in  America. - Кажуть, що в Америці пакування свинини - найбільш прибуткова праця після політики.

b) a compound verbal predicate: They are prepared to sacrifice everything to satisfy their yearning. (Maugham) - Вони ладні пожертвувати всім, аби задовольнити своє прагнення.

c) a simple verbal predicate: He has never been answered. (B.Aidiss) - Його ще ніхто і ніколи не спростував.

d) an indefinite personal past participle ending in -ho/-to: It is a sound instinct of the common people which persuades him that this all, that needs to be said, is said. (Maugham) -     Це здоровий глузд простого люду переконує його, таким чином, що все те, що треба сказати, - сказано.

e) any other contextual and structural substitution of the En­glish passive voice form: I must be left to myself for а while. (Hemingway) - Мені треба якийсь час побути самому.

The English passive voice constructions with prepositions have generally no equivalent passive constructions in Ukrainian. These are rendered then with the help of the indefinite personal forms of the verb:  Why do you not answer when you are spoken to? (Galsworthy) - Чому ви не відповідаєте, коли до вас звертаються?
